HaloMyBaby: Welcome, Dr. Patterson and Koko, we're so happy you're here!
DrPPatrsn: You're welcome!
HaloMyBaby: Is Koko aware that she's chatting with thousands of people now?
LiveKOKO: Good here.
DrPPatrsn: Koko is aware.
HaloMyBaby: I'll start taking questions from the audience now, our first question is: MInyKitty asks Koko are you going to have a baby in the future?
LiveKOKO: Pink
DrPPatrsn: We've had earlier discussion about colors today
LiveKOKO: Listen, Koko loves eat
HaloMyBaby: Me too!
DrPPatrsn: What about a baby? She's thinking...
LiveKOKO: Unattention
DrPPatrsn: She covered her face with her hands....which means it's not happening, basically, or it hasn't happened yet.
LiveKOKO: I don't see it.
HaloMyBaby: That's sad!
DrPPatrsn: In other words, she hasn't had one yet, and she doesn't see it happening. She needs several females and one male to have a family. In our setting it really isn't possible for her to have a baby.
HaloMyBaby: Do you see that situation changing when you get the Gorilla preserve on Maui?
DrPPatrsn: Yes, we do.
LiveKOKO: Listen.
DrPPatrsn: Koko wants to hear on the phone as we're doing this.
HaloMyBaby: Hi Koko! I can hear her! She breathed at me! This is so cool! In case you're curious, here's how Koko is able to participate in this chat: Dr. Penny Patterson is signing the questions to Koko from the online audience and a typist is entering for her.
DrPPatrsn: I'm working to create a family. In Hawaii, we'll have the ability to do that she's almost assured to have a family of her own.
HaloMyBaby: So she really is looking forward to this!
DrPPatrsn: She's making happy sounds now...
Question: EFRN asks: Would Koko like to have a kitten, a dog, or another Gorilla as a friend?
LiveKOKO: dog
DrPPatrsn: She actually has two dog friends right now one kitty and two gorillas.
HaloMyBaby: SBM87: ask What are the names of your kittens? (and dogs?)
LiveKOKO: foot
DrPPatrsn: Foot isn't the name of your kitty
HaloMyBaby: Koko, what's the name of your cat?
LiveKOKO: no
DrPPatrsn: She just gave some vocalizations there... some soft puffing
HaloMyBaby: I heard that soft puffing!
DrPPatrsn: Now shaking her head no.
Question: Do you like to chat with other people?
HaloMyBaby: That was from Rulucky!
LiveKOKO: fine nipple
DrPPatrsn: Nipple rhymes with people, she doesn't sign people per se, she was trying to do a "sounds like..."
HaloMyBaby: BSikor439 wants to know, Koko, Which of your paintings do you like most? Is she still painting?
DrPPatrsn: She hasn't seen her paintings for awhile. She is still painting.
HaloMyBaby: Tell us what she's doing right now!
DrPPatrsn: She's re-arranging the furniture in her room, basically. Let me move some of these boxes back. There's a lot of stuff her.e Let me ask her if she LIKES to paint...one second.
HaloMyBaby: Dr. Patterson, why is this such an important project?
DrPPatrsn: We're learning so many things on many levels, many of which I did not predict.
HaloMyBaby: You've devoted your whole life to it! What are we learning?
DrPPatrsn: I had started to simply see if another species could communicate with us in another language, such as sign language. She is very creative with that language and can talk about abstract things.
HaloMyBaby: I can see that!
DrPPatrsn: Surprising that she can be so creative. What I've discovered is that she has already got the system, it's not that I gave her this system. I simply share the vocabulary with her. It gives us a window into another species. They are our closest living relatives. It tells us so much about how we've evolved...learning so much about things such as reproductive physiology how they would like to see things happen in the future....she will respond to things at a sophisticated level...she actually discriminates phoning.
Question: I've heard people say she's not really communicating -- I think she's smarter than we are-- after all, how many of us can speak Gorilla!
DrPPatrsn: Exactly! She has learned our language but we haven't learned hers.
HaloMyBaby: What new is there to learn after 26 years?
DrPPatrsn: It says a lot about her species. Well, every day brings new surprises in terms of learning about gorillas in order to save them, but also about learning about ourselves. The things she comes up with surprise me.
HaloMyBaby: A basic earthy question for Koko from Earth2Kim: Koko, what is your favorite food, fruit, or vegetable?
DrPPatrsn: Ok...she's thinking...
HaloMyBaby: People have a lot of stereotypes!
LiveKOKO: I like drinks.
DrPPatrsn: What kind are your favorites?
LiveKOKO: Apple drink.
HaloMyBaby: SickboyRE asks: Koko, have you taught other gorrillas sign language, on your own?
DrPPatrsn: Good question.
LiveKOKO: myself
DrPPatrsn: part of that answer might be that she's taught us
HaloMyBaby: She's really creative!
DrPPatrsn: She's acknowledging that in that answer.
HaloMyBaby: She makes up some of her own terms, like Lips for woman.
DrPPatrsn: Right and foot for male.
HaloMyBaby: Another question from the audience: Does Koko like birds? I have the bird t-shirt she painted -- I'm wearing it now! (Available for purchase at KW Heaven!).
DrPPatrsn: She's very thoughtful today, she just walked away, she's looking out the window...
HaloMyBaby: She's looking at the birds!
DrPPatrsn: There are a number of blue jays that have been frequenting her play yard exactly! She's going to look at the birds!
HaloMyBaby: Are there any birds out there now?
DrPPatrsn: One just flew by. She expresses herself with actions. This is typical of young children.
HaloMyBaby: This is a very abstract one for her: Are you content with your life? That was from Jedi114. I'm very curious to see what she might say to that! We know she might not be able to answer everything, but we're going for it anyway!
DrPPatrsn: Koko, are you happy?
LiveKOKO: fine
HaloMyBaby: Here's one: Koko, where would you like to visit?
DrPPatrsn: That's hard because Koko doesn't travel.
HaloMyBaby: We were wondering about that.
DrPPatrsn: Her concept of space is very limited even in terms of a child.
HaloMyBaby: Would she like to go to Hawaii?
LiveKOKO: Look.
HaloMyBaby: Me too!
DrPPatrsn: She actually has travel logs of Hawaii that she watches on TV.
HaloMyBaby: Does she watch TV?
DrPPatrsn: Only public broadcasting.
HaloMyBaby: LOL.
LiveKOKO: Think.
HaloMyBaby: Storm 1004 asks: Dear Koko...I've watched you for years now...your gentle spirit is inspiration for many... I'd like to know what you'd like for your birthday.
HaloMyBaby: What a sweet question!
LiveKOKO: Birthday. Food and smokes.
HaloMyBaby: SMOKES?
DrPPatrsn: You have to understand...Smoke is also the name of her kitten.
HaloMyBaby: HMBarbari: asks Koko, Have you ever tried to teach your kittens sign language?
DrPPatrsn: She still has Smokey. She's looking out the window right now...Actually, I can tell you that she has not tried to teach them sign language but she has tried to nurse her kittens.
HaloMyBaby: Wow!
DrPPatrsn: It's very important to her. She's 310 lbs. I can't get her to turn around...
HaloMyBaby: LBratt0n asks, Koko do you have an email address?
DrPPatrsn: Koko does have an email address Koko@gorilla.org.
HaloMyBaby: JAM6860 asks, You like your trainer alot don't you? (I think she means you, Dr. P!)
DrPPatrsn: no comment...LOL. She's thinking about it. LOL.
Question: Hi Koko, you are a beautiful gorilla. Was it hard to learn sign language?
HaloMyBaby: OceanFish asked that one! I agree -- she's the most beautiful gorilla I know! ReBeL1999 asks, do you dream at night? Wouldn't it be amazing to know what a gorilla dreams!
DrPPatrsn: I asked her this once... I had to explain it. I asked her if she heard, smelled, saw things. I needed to explain what a dream was.
HaloMyBaby: What do you like to do best, for fun, asks TrukkasW? Sounds like Koko might have had enough?
DrPPatrsn: Maybe she has...
LiveKOKO: Hear the phone.
DrPPatrsn: Is there anything you'd like to say, Koko?
HaloMyBaby: We knew she might only be able to chat for about a half an hour...
DrPPatrsn: She just gave a little vocalization. She wants a little refreshment here.
Question: Were you real real sad when your cat died?
HaloMyBaby: BDurant79 asked that.
DrPPatrsn: She does remember her cat that died.
HaloMyBaby: How long ago was that?
DrPPatrsn: She does react with emotional words...That was in 1985.
She's having some snacks and food here.
LiveKOKO: lips, hurry, good, give me.
HaloMyBaby: Lips is woman, right?
DrPPatrsn: Right. She's got an alligator. She's playing with her
alligator and her lady dol. Oh, my! She may be doing a little acting
out here.
HaloMyBaby: She sounds like she's working out a bit of aggression! I'm trying to get a picture of where you are, what it looks like?
DrPPatrsn: We're in Koko's kitchen area. There are toys all around a refrigerator, television, stuffed animals, videos. It's got a lot of stuff including a harmonica but she pushed it away, doesn't wan to play with that. I gave her a couple of fabric bracelets... she's looking at them. She's putting it on her head because actually these are scrunchies.
LiveKOKO: fake, hat that
DrPPatrsn: She's pulling one of them and it's not fitting her hair.
HaloMyBaby: Does she have hair? Or is it like fur?
DrPPatrsn: She has hair.
LiveKOKO: fine
DrPPatrsn: She has fine hair. It's beautiful!
HaloMyBaby: How big is she?
DrPPatrsn: She's about 5 feet tall and weighs about 300-310 lbs. She
has a big tummy!
HaloMyBaby: Koko tell us what you look like in your words?
LiveKOKO: flower
DrPPatrsn: One of the scrunchies has a big flower on it.
LiveKOKO: eat now
DrPPatrsn: She wants some more of the snack, apparently.
LiveKOKO: sleep, red red
DrPPatrsn: She's indicating the red scrunchie.
LiveKOKO: sip
DrPPatrsn: I think it's about dinner time for her now.
HaloMyBaby: How do you feel about Michael?
LiveKOKO: foot, foot, good
HaloMyBaby: foot means male, right?
LiveKOKO: nipple
DrPPatrsn: Remember that foot=male, right.
LiveKOKO: good
DrPPatrsn: She's acting out a little here.
HaloMyBaby: What about Ndume?
LiveKOKO: bad
HaloMyBaby: Oh dear.
LiveKOKO: toilet
HaloMyBaby: Uh oh!
DrPPatrsn: That's her word for bad!
HaloMyBaby: I thought he was supposed to be her mate! What did he do to you today, Koko?
DrPPatrsn: I don't know... she doesn't have good things to say about him today.
LiveKOKO: down
DrPPatrsn: What did he do today? He did something obnoxious that was obnoxious, but I didn't see what happened. Maybe they had a little tiff.
HaloMyBaby: This is interesting, from the audience, not sure how you'd ask this: Koko, do you feel love from the humans who have raised you and cared for you? Ely35150 asked that. We'll see what she says!
DrPPatrsn: She's reading a birthday card.
LiveKOKO: lips, apple give me
DrPPatrsn: People give her her favorite foods.
LiveKOKO: love, browse drink nipple
DrPPatrsn: Browse is like... the little foods/snacks we give them.
LiveKOKO: koko loves that nipple drink, go
DrPPatrsn: She's kissing her alligator.
LiveKOKO: lights off good
DrPPatrsn: That's like a closer.
HaloMyBaby: That sounds like a good segue!
DrPPatrsn: She makes that sign when Ron has the lights on the camera.
HaloMyBaby: Let's let her off the hook then! Tell us that about the Maui preserve, what you're hoping to do?
DrPPatrsn: Our dream is to establish a preserve, 70 acres of land donated on West Maui by Maui Land & Pineapple Company that would be a sanctuary for gorillas including Koko, Michael and Ndume. A place where they would be safe and would be able to raise a family.
HaloMyBaby: Will you be able to recreate a natural family unit there?
DrPPatrsn: We're hoping. Not only would we hav a more natural environment because the climate is more like Africa, but also we'd be able to have one male, several females and their babies.
LiveKOKO: fake
DrPPatrsn: The alligator is biting the lady doll...
HaloMyBaby: What does fake mean to her?
LiveKOKO: gorilla
DrPPatrsn: She knows that what I'm saying hasn't happened yet.
LiveKOKO: brown
HaloMyBaby: She IS smart!
LiveKOKO: bad
DrPPatrsn: So, she's indicating that "fake" is not what she has now, even though I'm talking about it and the reason we haven't been able to make it happen yet is that we're working very hard to raise the money to make it happen. It will take about $7 million, and we're less than 1/2 way there.
HaloMyBaby: So everyone, buy t-shirts -- every one is a donation to the preserve! At Keyword:Heaven after the chat!
DrPPatrsn: We're hoping that corporations and the public will help us. We want Koko and her future family to share this dream. She very much wants to have a baby. She's indicated that this is what she wants.
HaloMyBaby: Is she about finished, do you think?
LiveKOKO: good, fine
DrPPatrsn: She's now putting a comb in the alligator's mouth.
LiveKOKO: have food lips
DrPPatrsn: Ok. She's ready for dinner!
HaloMyBaby: So we should say goodbye?
DrPPatrsn: She blew a kiss!
HaloMyBaby: Good bye and thank you Koko!
HaloMyBaby: Thank you Dr. Patterson!
LiveKOKO: look
HaloMyBaby: I would be happy to come see her so she could look at me!
LiveKOKO: hat that
DrPPatrsn: She's playing with her alligator.
HaloMyBaby: What will she do now when we get off the phone? What does she eat for dinner?
DrPPatrsn: She'll be very pleased to have her dinner. She has raw vegetables for dinner. She wants to hear, but the phone cord won't stretch.
HaloMyBaby: Hello Koko? (I just asked her about her dinner over the phone!)
LiveKOKO: visitor, koko loves lips
HaloMyBaby: I love her too!
LiveKOKO: good
HaloMyBaby: I'd like to see you some time!
DrPPatrsn: She's playing with her troll doll now!
DrPPatrsn: We'll sign off now!
HaloMyBaby: Thank you and good night!

################################################################
################ ANOTHER TRANSCRIPT STARTS HERE ################
################################################################

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Koko, we want to know about you and your friends and 
your interests. She wants to look at some new things we brought her. I don't 
know if she's in the mood for questions. Sometimes she answers nicely. 
Sometimes she waits a little while. Let's see how it goes!

Koko:  (getting a surprise box out of the other room)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  I have some fun things in here -- a funny nose on your 
gorilla doll! You can look at your new brush. There are some papers in your 
box, and a book and a hat! Nice! What does Koko like to do? She likes to play 
with new toys! And she also likes to get clothing. She likes to look at 
books, and we'll be doing some of that. She's kind of tossing her toys 
cavalierly aside.

Koko:  (looking at a new book)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  We'll be looking at books about Christmas presents. 
Koko likes to help me to design our catalog each year, and we're getting 
ideas right now from various catalogs, including the Target catalog.

Koko:  (finding a food surprise)

Koko:  Gorilla eat good!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  You're being silly, tossing all your things aside! I 
think we've gotten to the end of the box! Let's take a look at what you've 
got. A bag with animals on it.

Koko:  (Koko is looking at all of her new goodies)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Let's ask what Koko wants for Christmas. Koko, you want 
to tell me some things you'd like for Christmas?

Koko:  (Koko points at a videotape)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Hah! She got out a videotape. That's one thing in our 
catalog. Also she told me she wants a camera for Christmas! Want to tell us 
what you want for Christmas?

Koko:  That!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  She pointed to the word "glitter.” LOL.

Koko:  (flipping through the magazine)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  She pointed to her brush.

Koko:  That!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  The brush is actually in our catalog too. OK. Koko, 
someone wants to ask, "Do you like people?" Do you like people, gorillas, 
dogs, cats? Which do you like?

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Koko is thinking about it.

Koko:  (pointing to catalog)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Koko is pointing to the catalog. You like reading! I 
was asking you about living things, like people or gorillas or cats, or maybe 
even elephants! Or birds! She's looking at her empty nut bag. Do you like 
people? No? Well, what do you like? Koko is brushing herself. You do you like 
scratching. Like when I scratch your back? Or brushing? What do you like? 
Koko has picked up the videotape. I think she likes watching tapes. We do 
that a lot in the morning! So, you like watching movies, huh?

Koko:  (asking Penny to put in the video)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  We'll watch this one in a few minutes, OK?

Koko:  (looking at clothing)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  You got some clothing there!

Koko:  (pointing at herself)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Now she's pointing to her own picture! Do you like 
yourself? I like you, Koko.

Koko:  (going over to the mirror)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Koko is going to the mirror with my brush to brush her 
hair. She's purring. She's happy. Looking in the mirror and brushing her hair 
makes her happy.

Koko:  Toilet.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Honey? What? How about another question? What's your 
favorite color?

Koko:  Lips, fake hair. 

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Oh, you're being funny!

Koko:  Polite nipple. Polite. 

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Nipple means people. That's right.

Koko:  Gum, candy.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  That's your favorite food!

Koko:  Sip, sip, sip, sip, sip!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Koko loves a special drink, and it will be in your 
Christmas catalog. Koko's special drink. She's is kissing the picture. What 
is your favorite food to eat, Koko? Like -- do you like corn, apples, 
bananas, nuts?

Koko:  Drinks!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  I know, we were just talking about drinks. But which 
food do you like?

Koko:  Mail and apples!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  The reason she says mail is because she loves to lick 
envelopes, so the taste of mail is delicious to Koko. She's going to brush my 
hair. Thank you, sweetie! I speak a lot of English to Koko, because she 
processes English just as well as she processes sign language. Thank you for 
combing! You are doing a great job. Maybe you could pick a question, Koko. 
But I'll let you finish up my hair first! Thank you, Koko.

Koko:  (combing hair)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Now she's going to do her own hair with her beautiful 
comb. Gorgeous!

Koko:  Pink.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  That's close to your favorite color.

Koko:  Red! Red, red, red that!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Red. Yes. Red is your favorite color. And here is a 
VERY red blouse in the catalog. Do you like soft things?

Koko:  Soft.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  She signed soft with the red shirt on her cheek.

Koko:  Hungry there eat!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  She is hungry. What food are you hungry for?

Koko:  Orange. Apple.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  I don't have apples and oranges. I only have one thing 
in my pocket. Do you know what it is? We have another interesting question, 
Koko. We know that sometimes you are silly. Do you like to make jokes and be 
silly?

Koko:  (making kissing noises)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  She's kissing her orange kitten in the picture. Would 
you like to see your kitty?

Koko:  Cat tiger there.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Here's Mo! Is this kitty your baby, Koko? Your baby 
kitty? Is your kitty your baby?

Koko:  Candy. Hurry!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  I was asking about your kitty! What do you think about 
your kitty?

Koko:  (looking at Penny's earpiece)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  That's my earphone! We're talking about your cat. The 
earphone helps me hear. You've seen them before.

Koko:  (listening)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  She is listening to it!

Koko:  Good!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  You are so good. You are a very good gorilla. Are you a 
little bit upset today? What have you got there? She picked up her gorilla 
doll. It has a gorilla nose mask, which Koko is putting on. There you go! 
That's very charming!

Koko:  Drink.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  She wants me to get her another drink. Do you like it 
when the weather is hot or cold?

Koko:  Hot!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Gorillas like hot! Me too. When it's cold, we can't got 
out. OK, let's get a glass. Got it! Oh, Koko! Someone asks, "Do you like to 
tickle?" LOL. Honey, do you like to tickle?

Koko:  Tickle. Tickle on me.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  You like different games, huh? What games would you 
invent, Koko?

Koko:  Secret. Tickle foot!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  She likes to tickle feet. Foot has a double meaning. It 
can mean the body part or a "boy."

Koko:  Tickle nipple.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  She likes to tickle people too.

Koko:  Tickle Ndume. He's sweet!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  That was a nice thing to say. Ndume is your boyfriend! 
Speaking of sweet Ndume, do you want to have a baby? Would you like a baby?

Koko:  Drink.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Do you want to have a baby?

Koko:  (drinking)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  All these questions are making you thirsty!

Koko:  More.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  I'm thirsty too.

Koko:  Time to go.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Do you like babies?

Koko:  Koko love, love, good, hurry!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Oh, honey. We want you to have a baby. She wants a 
drink too! We're very much in the immediate moment here! I bet you would talk 
with your baby. You would talk with your baby with hands, right?

Koko:  Speak with hands.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  The hand is the way a gorilla speaks. Humans speak with 
a microphone.

Koko:  Love baby.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  I think you're an extremely hungry gorilla! I think I'm 
going to give you the rest of these nuts in my pocket. Why don't we do 
something different? Hey! A question for me! Do I get to answer a question, 
or do you want to answer all the questions, Koko?

Koko:  (picking up a phone in the room)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Will visitors be allowed at the new Maui sanctuary? 
Gorillas are very, very private, so we will have virtual visitors. Male 
gorillas especially feel the need to protect their families. But the virtual 
visits will allow people to experience what it is like at the center. The 
visitor center will likely be in a nearby town, and some visitors may even 
get to chat with Koko in real time. And they'll get to see Koko's paintings. 
She is a very good painter.

Koko:  (reading)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  It is a way for the public to visit with Koko while 
still respecting her privacy. Koko is reading now, having a little private 
time! Where did that page go that I gave you? Maybe you'd like to do a little 
writing. You're very much into microphones today! She's using her brush as a 
microphone. She's clearly aware of the fact that we are communicating right 
now. What have you got there? Oh! Koko actually has some of her paintings. 
Another question for me! Oh, boy, Koko! It's about whether you sign to your 
animal friends. Do you ever sign to your kitty?

Koko:  Kitty, yes.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  I've seen you sign to your kitty. Sometimes she signs 
"tickle," and sometimes "chase" to the dog. Am I right about that?

Koko:  Yes.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Koko is coming over to visit her kitty. Mo has been 
eating and resting. Come out and visit us, Mo. I think Mo is tired today. 
Koko is looking at the book about her kitty. How is your Smoky cat, Koko? She 
just found the picture of Smoky in the catalog, on a T-shirt. Yes, Koko, 
that's Smoky cat!

Koko:  That!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  She's going to wear it! How nice! She's pointing to 
Smoky and then to herself. She pointed to her nose and then Smoky's nose. 
Yes! You both have noses! I think you love Smoky.

Koko:  Hungry.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Koko? Do YOU have any questions for the people?

Koko:  No!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Do you like people?

Koko:  Nipple.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Yes, people. She's going to reach under my shirt! Oh, 
my!

Koko:  (pinching)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  That was a pinch, Koko!

Koko:  Go chase!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  OK, we're going to go play and chase around the room 
for a minute. LOL. What?

Koko:  Break.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Koko needs to take a break. Here's a good one, Koko! 
You'll like this one! It's a question about questions! Koko likes to read 
sometimes, when she takes a bathroom break.

Koko:  That do.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Here's the question. It's funny. Do you like questions, 
Koko?

Koko:  (thinking)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Another question for me! Does Penny like questions?

Koko:  (pointing at Penny's earphone)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  “How can we help Koko?” they ask. How can we help YOU, 
Koko? People want to help you, sweetie, help you to have a hot home in 
Hawaii. And also to save your friends and family in Africa. They can donate 
at helping.org or gorilla.org and help us to create the first gorilla 
preserve outside Africa, and to help change peoples' perception of gorillas 
all around the world. Koko is helping with her book about her kitty. Where 
did your pen go, sweetie? Ndume is at the door! Knock! Knock!

Koko:  (writing an "N")

Dr. Penny Patterson:  She is writing an "N" for Ndume. Sometimes she does 
write letters, and she makes a pretty decent signature, too.

Koko:  Gorilla.

Koko:  Gorilla gorilla that!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  She just wrote Ndume's name. 

Koko:  Good!

Dr. Penny Patterson: You are good, Koko! It's about time for you to have a 
treat. You've been good.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  How do you know when you're good, Koko?

Koko:  (purring)

Koko:  Good.

Dr. Penny Patterson:  She purred and signed "good."

Koko:  Happy!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  She likes to talk about her feelings.

Koko:  Polite gorilla feels sorry and nice. Come on, it's time!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  She says "it's time" to have a snack.

Koko:  (blowing kiss)

Dr. Penny Patterson:  We're going to say "bye." She is blowing a kiss to 
everyone. You are a good gorilla!

Koko:  Good!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Thank you to all the folks at AOL and Target and our 
staff here.

Koko:  Lips!

Dr. Penny Patterson:  Yes, Koko, we will thank all the women especially!